---
title: "2.3. Huffman Encoding"
date: 2019-01-04T20:55:57+07:00
anchor: "deflate_huffman"
weight: 40
---

Huffman encoding is a statistical compression method. It encodes data symbols (such as characters) with <bold>variable-length codes</bold>, and lengths of the codes are based on the frequencies of corresponding symbols. 

Huffman encoding, as well as other variable-length coding methods, has two properties:

1. Codes for <bold>more frequently occurring</bold> data symbols are <bold>shorter</bold> than codes for less frequently occurring data symbols.
2. Each code can be <bold>uniquely decoded</bold>. This requires the codes to be <bold>prefix codes</bold>, meaning any code for one symbol is not a prefix of codes for other symbols. For example, if code <code>“0”</code> is used for symbol <code>“A”</code>, then code <code>“01”</code> cannot be used for symbol <code>“B”</code> as code <code>“0”</code> is a prefix of code <code>“01”</code>. The prefix property guarantees when decoding there is no ambiguity in determining where the symbol boundaries are. 

Huffman encoding has two steps:

1. Build a Huffman tree from original data symbols. A Huffman tree is a binary tree structure.
2. Traverse the Huffman Tree and assign codes to data symbols.

Huffman codes can be <bold>fixed (static)</bold> or <bold>dynamic</bold>. Both are used in deflate method.

Fixed Huffman codes can be created by examining a large number of data sets, and finding typical code lengths. When using fixed Huffman coding, the same codes are used for all the input data symbols.

Dynamic Huffman codes are generated by breaking input data into blocks, and generating codes for each data block.
